Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Additive Manufacturing
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/addma
Full Length Article
Role of scan strategies on thermal gradient and solidi ﬁcation rate in electron
beam powder bed fusion ☆
Y.S. Lee a,b,⁎
, M.M. Kirka a,b, R.B. Dinwiddie a,b, N. Raghavan c,d, J. Turner d, R.R. Deho ﬀa,b,
S.S. Babu a,c
a Manufacturing Demonstration Facility, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Knoxville, TN, USA
b Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA
c Department of Mechanical, Aerospace and Biomedical Engineering, University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA
d Computer Science and Mathematics Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Additive manufacturing
Scan strategy
Melt pool
Solidiﬁcation and remelting
In-situ monitoring
Numerical simulation
ABSTRACT
Local microstructure control in electron beam powder bed fusion (EB-PBF) is of great interest to the additive
manufacturing community to realize complex part geometry with targeted performance. The local micro-
structure control relies on having a detailed understanding of local melt pool physics (e.g., 3-D melt pool shape
as well as spatial and temporal variations of thermal gradient (G) and solidi ﬁcation rate (R)). In this research, a
new scan strategy referred to as ghost beam is numerically evaluated as a candidate to achieve the targeted G
and R of IN718 alloy. The boundary conditions for simulations, including the speed (490 mm/s) and spatial
locations of the beam within a given layer, are obtained by using series of snapshot images, recorded at 12,000
frames per second, using a high-speed camera. The heat transfer simulations were performed using TRUCHAS an
open-source software deployed within a high-performance computational infrastructure. The simulation results
showed that reheating at short beam on-time and time delay decreases both G and R. Local variation of R at the
center of the melt pool trailing edge showed periodic temporal ﬂuctuations. Finally, the ghost beam scan strategy
was compared to other existing raster and spot scan strategies.
1. Introduction
Additive manufacturing (AM) has the potential to revolutionize the
way individuals design and consume the products [ 1]. It o ﬀers a su-
perior design ﬂexibility over inside and outside of the components
without additional cost, which is not possible with the traditional
manufacturing technologies [ 2,3]. Moreover, AM may potentially
eliminate additional tooling, as well as, a reduction of part weight, lead
time, assembly cost and material waste [ 2,4]. So far, AM technology has
been limited to rapid prototyping and low volume production due to
complicated process ﬂow, lack of reliability, and expensive infra-
structure needs. Nevertheless, as the process becomes more reliable,
AM may transition from prototyping to mass production [ 4]. Some of
the projections estimate a reduction in production cost by 50% and an
increase of 4× in production rate over the next ﬁve years [ 3]. These
projections have triggered the need for various process optimization
methodologies to enable rapid production and high quality-multi-
functional parts for di ﬀerent applications, through defect and micro-
structure control. Numerous process optimization studies have been
reported to obtain the desired microstructure and resultant mechanical
properties through electron beam powder bed fusion (EB-PBF) process
[5–8]. These studies indicate that process parameters have a strong
inﬂuence on spatial and temporal thermal signatures [ i.e., T {x, y, z,
time} temperature pro ﬁle, temperature gradient (G) and solidiﬁ cation
rate (R)], which in turn a ﬀect the solidi ﬁcation, solid-state transfor-
mation, residual stress evolution, and distortion. Although, most of the
published research focuses on geometrical conformity, defect mitiga-
tion, reduction of residual stresses and distortions, the role of scan
strategy on local and global microstructure evolutions have often been
minimal, until the publication of capability to control the micro-
structure at site-speci ﬁc locations.
For local microstructure control at micro-scale, EB-PBF has the
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.addma.2018.04.038
Received 1 June 2017; Received in revised form 18 April 2018; Accepted 28 April 2018
☆ Notice of Copyright. This manuscript has been authored by UT-Battelle, LIC under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. The United States
Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the United States Government retains a non-exclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, world-wide
license to publish or reproduce the published form of this manuscript, or allow others to do so, for United States Government purposes. The Department of Energy will provide public
access to these results of federally sponsored research in accordance with the DOE Public Access Plan ( http://energy.gov/downloads/doe-public-access-plan).
⁎ Corresponding author at: Materials Science and Technology Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, TN, USA.
E-mail address: leey@ornl.gov (Y.S. Lee).
Additive Manufacturing 22 (2018) 516–527
Available online 30 April 2018
2214-8604/ Published by Elsevier B.V.
Tability to alter local process parameters and scan patterns due to high
deﬂection speed and control of beam on-time and current [ 7]. This
ability enables EB-PBF to change the spatial and temporal energy
density in a given layer. Helmer et al. [ 9] reported that di ﬀerent grain
morphology of IN718 can be obtained by changing scan strategies such
as line o ﬀset, scan speed and rotation order of the hatch. Recently, a
spot melting strategy was introduced by Deho ﬀ et al. [ 10] to spatially
control IN718 microstructure. They tailored grain morphology and
created the letters “D-O-E” by overlapping both raster and spot melting
scan patterns. Raghavan et al. [ 11] investigated the e ﬀect of input
parameters (e.g., beam diameter, beam current, beam on-time and
preheat temperature) on solidi ﬁcation conditions in EB-PBF spot
melting process. The simulation showed that the solidiﬁ cation micro-
structure can be controlled in local regions by accessing G and R values
that span across many orders of magnitude. Such variations allowed
these researchers to move from columnar to equiaxed solidi ﬁcation
grain morphology, on demand. In addition, a numerical simulation with
Hilbert path, Oxen path, and spiral path was also suggested to explore
the role of scan patterns in the processing of Ti-6Al-4V [ 1]. The study
showed that Oxen path results in an elongated ellipsoidal shaped melt
pool with high-temperature gradient while Hilbert path leads to cir-
cular shaped melt pool with uniform heating and reduced temperature
gradient. Kirka et al. [ 12] reported control of microstructure and me-
chanical properties in a Ni-based superalloy build by selecting raster
and/or spot- scan strategies. They achieved a gradual transition from
columnar to equiaxed grain as a function of point energy density during
spot melting, with higher energy density leading to low G that pro-
moted the equiaxed grains. Raster and spot melting are the scan pat-
terns commonly used in metal based EB-PBF [ 5,9–11,13]. Raster scan
pattern is relatively simple to use but precise control of its path is hard
due to continuous nature of this scan pattern [ 14]. The raster scan
pattern is less stable during the 180° turn at the edges of a given geo-
metry which leads to uneven energy distribution and makes it suscep-
tible to defects [ 15,16]. Although attempts have been made to use
turning point functions to control overheating or under-melting, re-
moval of porosity defects from a wide range of geometries are still te-
dious and di ﬃ cult process [ 15]. In contrast, spot melting does not use
the turning point functions and therefore is more stable. However,
deployment of spot melting across wide range geometrical cross-sec-
tions requires additional design and control of process parameters and
scan patterns. Therefore, a demand for a new EB-PBF scan pattern that
can take advantages of both raster and spot melting patterns for any
build geometry has been realized.
Furthermore, there is also an urgent need to arrive at optimum scan
strategies as a function of cross-sectional geometries through predictive
approaches using numerical simulations. Notably, the predictive cap-
ability of numerical simulation relies on an accurate description of
input parameters and boundary conditions relevant to EB-PBF [ 17].
This information can be accessed by high-resolution thermal sensing
techniques with time stamping, i.e. high speed or infrared cameras.
Later, the time-resolved data can be used to validate the simulation
results.
The EB-PBF process is highly transient and localized such that
observing the entire process using a ﬁne time resolution (1 μs), spatial
resolution (< 1 μm) and larger ﬁeld of view (> 10 mm) becomes im-
practical and costly. Furthermore, the in-situ sensing is limited only to
top surface. Because of this, it is hypothesized that the combined use of
the high temporal resolution sensing data as a simulation input would
be a preferred way to acquire both the e ﬃ ciency and accuracy in the
numerical prediction of G and R in di ﬀerent length scales.
This leads to a fundamental question, what should be the next best
electron beam scanning strategy? Since the underlying physics of ad-
ditive manufacturing has a lot in common with welding, the answer to
this question can be gleaned from the welding research literature. With
the rapid development of beam deﬂ ection tools, various applications of
electron beam have been accessed in welding community (i.e. multi-
focus, oscillation, beam splitting) [ 18–21]. Particularly, beam splitting
was recently developed and employed for welding aluminum [ 20] and
near the alpha titanium alloy [ 21]. The beam splitting technique may
reduce physical defects including hot cracking, porosity, and distortion.
Moreover, since it enables on-demand control of beam power, speed,
on-time and distance between the spots, precise control of melt pool
size and geometry can be achieved in principle for local microstructure
control. Interestingly, the e ﬀect of periodic variation of melt pool
geometry, peak temperature, cooling rate, thermal gradient and soli-
diﬁcation rate on the microstructure of weld metal had been reported in
double-pulsed gas metal arc welding by Wang et al. [ 22]. Similarly, Lim
et al. [ 23,24] have also controlled the microstructure evolution in
nickel alloy welds through magnetic stirring. In this research, the beam
splitting technique has been adopted to EB-PBF for IN718 alloy and is
referred to as ghost beam scanning by Arcam ® software. Next, the in-
ﬂuence of ghost beam on local microstructure is predicted in terms of
melt pool shape, thermal gradient, and solidi ﬁcation rate. The e ﬀect of
ghost beam scan is compared with raster and spot melting strategies
commonly used in EB-PBF to allow for proper deployment in future AM
process development for site-speci ﬁc control on complex geometries.
2. Numerical and experimental setup
2.1. Beam splitting and scan strategies
Arcam A2 machine was utilized to build the cube blocks on the start
plate with dimensions of 150 mm × 150 mm. Phantom v411 high-
speed video camera was installed on the A2 machine. It captured beam
intensity and melt pool images of the representative six cubes shown in
Fig. 1. The imaging was carried out through a leaded glass window and
Kapton ﬁlm. 135 mm lens was used with frame rate of 12,000 per
second. F/Stop setting is 4.0 which adjusts the amount of the light
coming into the lens. The exposure time was ∼1 ms (8.3 × 10
−5 s).
The fabricated cube has dimensions of 20 mm × 20 mm and the spacing
between the cubes is 5 mm. In the ghost beam scan strategy, the user
can set the melting spot on-time, ghost spot on-time and time delay
between the melting and ghost beam. The spot on-time de ﬁnes beam
moving distance. The time delay determines skip-spacing between the
melting and ghost beam. For clear description, the terminology of the
melting and ghost beam is rede ﬁned as a primary and secondary beam,
respectively. The detailed description of the scan strategy will be given
in the following section.
Fig. 2 illustrates four di ﬀerent scan strategies considered in this
research. First, the ghost beam scan strategy in Fig. 2(a) consists of two
melting beams, primary (P) and secondary (S). The EB-PBF machine
user can set speci ﬁc spot on-time for each of the primary and secondary
beam. For simplicity, the spot on-time is set to be identical 3 ms (or
1 ms) for the primary and secondary beam. The melting distance of the
beam can be determined by the product of spot on-time and beam ve-
locity. The melting occurs by primary beam followed by the secondary
beam. The start location of the following beam, i.e. skip-spacing, is
deﬁned by time delay. For instance, the skip-spacing is calculated by
the product of time delay and beam velocity. Hence, the secondary
beam starts 2 mm behind of the primary beam for a case with 2 ms time
delay and 1000 mm/s beam velocity. In the present study, 2 ms, 6 ms,
12 ms, 50 ms and 100 ms time delay were set for the cubes 1 –6 with
3 ms spot on-time in Fig. 1(a). 0.5 ms, 1 ms, 1.25 ms, 1.5 ms, 2 ms and
6 ms time delay were set for the cubes 7– 12 with 1 ms spot on-time in
Fig. 1(b). Each scan strategy produces di ﬀerent area of reheating (or
remelting) due to di ﬀerent spot on-time and time delay. Since reheating
potentially leads to change in melt pool physics and resultant thermal
conditions, the temperature pro ﬁle and melt pool geometry are in-
vestigated in the later section.
Three other scan patterns are also selected to compare with the
patterns of ghost beam. Raster scan is the most common scan pattern in
EB-PBF [see Fig. 2(b)] as it is easy to implement and has simple space-
ﬁlling algorithms [ 14]. The beam horizontally moves from left to right
Y.S. Lee et al. Additive Manufacturing 22 (2018) 516–527
517direction on the powder bed. Then, it moves down by hatch spacing,
200 μm and restarts the sweep from the right to left. Spot melting
pattern has been recently introduced in EB-PBF. Individual spot is ap-
plied at a speci ﬁc location with pre-de ﬁned spot-on time and moving
sequence. For spot-consecutive in Fig. 2(c), the spot sequentially moves
next by next from left to right direction with 400 μm spacing (=spot
diameter) between the spots. Then, the direction is reversed from right
to left after moving 200 μm down. For spot-ordered in Fig. 2(d), the
spot is on the ﬁrst spot point 1 and skips two spots to make the second
spot 2. The melting continues until it reaches the last spot 8 at the end
of the ﬁrst line. Then, it returns to the position 5 and skips two spots to
melt the next spot. Following line starts from the most left spot 12 after
200 μm down. The pattern order is repeated until the full melting is
achieved at the ﬁfth line. In Fig. 2(b), the electron beam moves 4 mm
with 500 mm/s. Thus, spot on-time is calculated to 8 ms for one-line
melting and 40 ms for entire ﬁve lines melting. In Fig. 2(c) and (d) for
spot melting, the spot on-time 40 ms can be divided by 55 spots for the
time per individual spot. The raster scan in EB-PBF can be assumed as
the collection of the spots placed in ﬁnitesimally closer to each other.
Thus, it can be assumed that the line of raster scan consists of spots
having 10 μm spacing. Since the spot diameter is 400 μm, the 10 μm
spacing is reasonably small enough to represent the continuity of the
line. Power of 300 W and preheat temperature of 1273 K are used for
this simulation.
2.2. Modeling approach
2.2.1. Governing equation and heat source model
The 3-D transient simulation was implemented based on the nu-
merical solution of heat transfer equation. The governing equation (Eq.
(1)) is discretized and then solved using ﬁnite volume method (FVM),
multi-physics code Truchas developed at Los Alamos National Labora-
tory [ 11,25]:
=∇ + ∂
∂Q xyz σ T ρ hT
t
˙(, , ) (() )2
(1)
where the heat ﬂux introduced by the electron beam is Q˙, the thermal
conductivity is σ, the density of the material is ρ, the temperature is T
in Kelvin, the enthalpy per unit mass is h and the time is t.
During the EB-PBF process, an electron beam is used as a thermal
energy heat source to fuse the powder particles on the start plate. To
considerthematerial-heatsourceinteraction,amovingvolumetricheat
Fig. 1. Prismatic blocks on 150 mm × 150 mm Arcam start plate.
Fig. 2. Scan strategies used for (a) ghost beam (b) raster (c) spot-consecutive and (d) spot-ordered.
Y.S. Lee et al. Additive Manufacturing 22 (2018) 516–527
518source with Gaussian heat distribution was adapted as a heat ﬂux
boundary condition. The mathematic equation of the heat source
[13,26] is expressed as:
=Q xyz AP II
D
˙(, , ) em a x
xy z
p (2)
where the absorptance of the electron beam is Ae which is typically
90% [ 11], the maximum power of the beam is Pmax (Watts), the in-
tensity distribution on X-Y plane is Ixy, the vertical intensity distribution
along Z axis is Iz , and the penetration depth of the beam is Dp. The beam
shape on the surface and the vertical penetration depth can be de ﬁned
by Ixy and Iz . Thus, Eq. ( 2) can be rewritten as below [ 13,26]:
⎜⎟ ⎜⎟
=− − ⎡
⎣⎢
−+ ⎤
⎦⎥
× ⎡
⎣
⎢−⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
+ ⎛
⎝
⎞
⎠
+ ⎤
⎦
⎥
Qxyz AP πd D
xy
d
z
D
z
D
˙(, , ) 9.21exp 9.21( )
32 1
em a x
b p b
pp
2
22
2
2
(3)
where the diameter of the electron beam is db. The penetration depth,
Dp can be calculated using equation below [ 11,26]:
=× −DV ρ2.1 10 ( / )pe bed
52 (4)
where the beam acceleration voltage is Ve, 60kV and the powder bed
density is ρbed, 3925 kg/m 3 for IN718 [ 27].
2.2.2. Boundary conditions
The 3-D computation domain was created in Fig. 3 using mesh and
geometry generation toolkit CUBIT by Sandia National Laboratory. The
domain has dimensions of 2.2 mm (width or X) x 10 mm (length or Y) x
0.6 mm (height or Z). A uniform 15 μm mesh was used to spatially
discretize the rectangular domain. That produced 485,180 structured
hexahedron elements.
For the surfaces other than top surface, since the conductivity of the
powder bed is only 0.3 –1.5% of the same bulk material [ 11,27], adia-
batic condition was assumed such that there is zero heat ﬂux passing
through the surfaces. The top surface is exposed to the vacuum atmo-
sphere. Hence, the convectional heat loss was assumed to be negligible.
The heat loss from the top is described by the following equation
[8,26]:
=− −q Aφ εT T( )R s r
4 4 (5)
where the radiation heat loss from the top is qR, The area of the top
surface is As, Stefan-Boltzmann constant is φ, emissivity is εand the
roomtemperatureis Tr . In practice,Tr is around 700 K but the di ﬀerence
is assumed to be ignorable. The values of 240 W for beam power
( = beam current × beam accelerating voltage) and 490 mm/s for scan
speed were used in this simulation. The acquisition of these values is
described in the later section. Preheat is used to prevent particle re-
pulsion caused by particle charging and increased thermal conductivity
of the powder bed [ 28]. Preheat temperature1273 K was applied as an
initial condition of the simulation. The other key parameters used are
summarized in Table 1.
Thermal conductivity of liquid was enhanced by ten times to ac-
count for convective heat transfer in the melt pool [ 29–32]. Thermal
expansion and solidi ﬁcation shrinkage were assumed to be negligible.
Material properties used in this simulation are listed in Table 2.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Derivation of boundary conditions with in-situ measurements
The beam speed and current used to melt the powder layer can be
estimated based on the Arcam parameter functions such as beam cur-
rent compensation, speed function, thickness function, turning point
function [ 33–35] and log ﬁles. The current compensation is used to
modify the beam current to consider the discrepancy of energy input
between the short and long line length. Longer line length needs longer
time to complete the melting such that it deposits more energy than a
shorter one. The speed function is a non-linear empirical relationship
between speed and current. It is used to ensure constant melt pool size
over the process. The values of speed function have not been published
due to the intellectual property of the machine but the qualitative re-
lationship was reported in the literature [ 35]. For raster scan strategy,
the energy is accumulated when beam turns near the edge of a given
geometry. Thus, the turning point function is used to keep the energy
constant at the start of each pass by increasing the speed. Thickness
function reduces the energy input above the overhangs. It increases the
Fig. 3. Snapshots of high-speed camera for scan speed calculation (a) cube 8 (b) cube 11, spacing between the cubes is 5 mm corresponding to 64 pixels.
Table 1
Process parameters used in simulation.
Parameter Values (unit)
Beam on-time 3 or 1 (ms)
Beam power 240 (W)
Scan speed 490 (mm/s)
Spot diameter 200 ( μm)
Preheat 1273 (K)
Beam accelerating voltage 60 (kV)
Table 2
Material properties of IN718 used in simulation.
Parameter Values (unit)
Density 7451 (kg/m 3)
Thermal conductivity of solid 26.6 (W/m-K)
Thermal conductivity of liquid 290 (W/m-K, Enhanced)
Speciﬁc heat of solid 600 (J/kg-K)
Speciﬁc heat of liquid 775 (J/kg-K)
Liquidus temperature 1610 (K)
Solidus temperature 1528 (K)
Latent heat 227,000 (J/kg)
Y.S. Lee et al.
Additive Manufacturing 22 (2018) 516–527
519Fig. 4. Evolution of melt pool by ghost beam as a function of time along Y-axis in the cube 1 –12 and schematic explanation of the periodic converging and diverging
motion of the beam for cube 6, the primary and secondary beam is denoted as P and S, respectively. (a) –(e): 3 ms spot on-time and 2 ms to 100 ms time delay, (f) –(k):
1 ms spot on-time and 0.5 –5 ms time delay.
Y.S. Lee et al. Additive Manufacturing 22 (2018) 516–527
520